Madam President,

Mr Vice-President,

Prime Minister,

Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

Thank you so much again for the warm welcome and for hosting our EU-India Summit. It was a genuine honour for António and me to attend the Republic Day celebrations. I was deeply moved by the ceremony. It made me reflect on the ancient ties that bind our two continents, our two civilizations.

The relationship between Europe and India goes back thousands of years. We have long been connected and inspired through trade, science and culture. From the earliest discoveries by Indian astronomers to the mathematicians who helped shape the European enlightenment, or modern voices like Rabindranath Tagore, the first Indian to win the Nobel Prize. His poetry speaks to us still today, every time India's national anthem is sung.

This history is the foundation for the transformative partnership we are building today. In the fields of economy, technology, and far beyond. And the political ties between Europe and India have never been stronger. The European Union and India are natural strategic partners. Because we have so much in common. We are the two biggest democracies, rooted in the rule of law, pluralism, and respect for human dignity is at our core. We are both unions made up of many regions, bringing together people of different languages, backgrounds and cultures. But we respect this diversity. Unity in diversity is the motto on both sides. Our strengths complement each other. Europe's experience and technology is matched with India's energy, creativity and ingenuity. And our scale gives us global influence. Whether in trade, security, or international relations. This is why India has risen to the top rank of global politics, which Europe welcomes. So just imagine what we can achieve if we combine the resources of Europe and India.

And that is precisely why we are here today. It is a decisive moment in our partnership, with our free trade agreement opening the world's largest trading zone ever. An unprecedented market of almost 2 billion people. It means more than trade. It means more and better jobs. More and closer friendships. More connections. More opportunities for our businesses and our people. And fewer dependencies. And this is only the beginning. This agreement forms the foundation of the crucial partnership between Europe and India. We are sending a strong signal to the world. In a time where the world is becoming more and more fractured and fractious. At this time, India and Europe are choosing dialogue, collaboration and cooperation.

Distinguished guests,

Today is about more than economics. Europe and India are also stepping up strategically. And this is why today we launched our Security and Defence Partnership. To protect Indian and European interests. And to bring stability and reassurance in volatile times. So that our people can feel safe, and our businesses can trade with confidence and certainty.

Distinguished guests,

We have achieved so much already. Now with these agreements, we can scale even greater heights. Together we can build a new Golden Road between our continents. And pave the way to an even brighter future for India and for Europe. I look forward to deepening this partnership with you.

Jai Hind. Long Live Europe.

Prime Minister Modi,

Minister Goyal,

Commissioner Šefčovič,

Excellencies,

Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is a privilege and a distinct pleasure to be with you today. I very much welcome this opportunity to hear your contributions. This is indeed a momentous day for the EU-India relationship, especially from an economic and business perspective. Because the business sector is key to relations between Europe and India. At this moment, strong partnerships have never been more important. And one thing is clear: India and Europe are trusted and reliable strategic partners. We stand together. United in our commitment to help our businesses endure, thrive and grow. To reduce our strategic dependencies. And to realise the incredible potential of our economic relationship.

This brings me to my first point. Today, Prime Minister Modi and I have concluded the Free Trade Agreement negotiations between Europe and India. Together, Europe and India are creating the world's largest trading zones. The FTA between Europe and India is a clear strategic choice. A choice for certainty and predictability in an uncertain world. This FTA will give businesses what they value most: clear rules, stable market access, and long-term confidence to invest. It signals that Europe and India are choosing cooperation over fragmentation, and partnership over uncertainty. Because our FTA ushers in a new era. It unites two of the world's largest economies. That is a market of 2 billion people - a quarter of global GDP. It brings lower tariffs and export duties, and simplified customs procedures. European companies already employ more than 3 million people in India. And Indian firms are investing more and more in Europe. In ten years, goods traded between Europe and India have almost doubled to 120 billion EUR. Now the FTA will unleash even more potential and combine our strengths to create even greater levels of growth. And that is just the beginning.

This is my second point. Trade connects economies, but investment anchors them. Deeper investment is what truly strengthens our economic relationship. Investment builds long-term partnerships, jobs, and resilience. So, I want our FTA to be a platform not only for more trade, but also for more investment. European companies are ready to invest more in India. Like the EUR 1.1 billion investment for solar projects, led by EDF Renewables. Or the long-awaited opening of IKEA's first store in India, right here in Delhi. But I know that we can do so much more. So, I welcome the continued discussions on market access, finances, and investments. To deepen this framework beyond trade, Prime Minister Modi and I have asked our teams to complete negotiations on Investment Protection and Geographical Indications. I am confident we can make progress to provide a secure framework for two-way investment.

My third point concerns safe and reliable supply chains. We all understand the need to reduce dependencies and increase diversification. So, we are focusing on specific strategic industries and critical technologies. Like advanced components, where our new Semiconductor Agreement will be key. Creating alternative supply chains creates major opportunities. And today I can introduce a new initiative called Blue Valleys. These are designed to boost industrial cooperation in strategic sectors, by connecting business, regulators and investors. They will help to remove barriers, mobilise investment, and scale up joint industrial capacity. Each Blue Valley will focus on a specific sector, like clean tech or machinery, at a specific location in India. European and Indian businesses will be encouraged to form partnerships inside the Blue Valley. So, the goal is to foster more business-to-business relationships. And further integrate each other's value chains. This concept is ideal for sectors where Europe and India are active on both supply and demand side. A small but very successful pilot project was tested in Assam. And now we will expand this to larger-scale projects in other parts of India, in areas like solar invertors and electrolysers.

This brings me to my final point. The clean transition has huge dividends for those who lead it. Including lower energy prices and increased competitiveness. To harness this potential, boost investment and foster business, we will host a Wind Business Summit this year. And our Task Force on Green Hydrogen will drive innovation and play a key role in decarbonisation. We want to unite with India on this new frontier. Because I am confident that Europe and India can lead on clean tech.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

There is an Indian quote which I like: Wisdom grows through listening. This is what we did here today, and what we should do in future. Thank you for showing how we can make our relationship even stronger and deeper. I very much look forward to seeing the full potential of the FTA brought to life by our businesses.

Thank you very much.

